[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Graham Nicholls was one of
those young children who saw
strangers--
strangers who were
invisible to others--
standing at the foot of his bed
as he went to sleep at night.
Initially frightened by
these experiences, over time
the opening that occurred
in his psyche began
showing him future events,
including the London bombings.
Through his ability to
see beyond time and space,
Graham learned to see
the interconnectedness
and love in all things.
Along with taking part in the
psychic experiments conducted
by the esteemed biologist
Rupert Sheldrake,
Graham documented
his experiences
in his book titled "Avenues
of the Human Spirit."
So here we are in
central London.
It's a busy day, weekday here.
We have a lot of
construction going on.
So I'm just saying that.
If anybody hears some--
well, I hear a buzz
saw and a hammer--
just let it blend in
with the background.
So that said, you've had a
really different kind of life
from the perspective of
the average person in that
from a very early age, you were
able to see into other areas
or other dimensions, realms.
I'm sure you have your
own way of explaining that
and maybe you can
give us an idea
of what started happening
at a very early age for you.
>> Well, the first experience
that ever happened was when I
was about five to seven.
I'm not exactly
sure how old I was.
But I was living in
an apartment block.
And I came out of my bedroom
just to go to the toilet
or whatever as you do during the
night, walked into the hallway,
and there was a figure
standing in the doorway that
led out into the landing to
get out of the apartment.
So there was this figure
just standing there
staring straight at me.
And I obviously was
very surprised by this
and completely overwhelmed.
I just was terrified really.
And I dropped to
the ground I think
to try and get some sense of
something solid from the floor.
I wanted to feel
like this was real.
And that was something not what
I would usually experience.
So I wanted to get this
sense of normality back.
Then I tried to call
out to my parents.
And I was so frightened, I
couldn't even make any sound.
I was just almost frozen
by the experience.
And then eventually,
it just kind of ended.
I don't remember the real
details of the whole thing
because I was so young.
But that was the thing that
really opened the whole process
up.
>> Did you feel different
after this experience?
>> It seemed to open me
up to a sense that yeah,
that there was more around.
And when I was at school
and around other kids,
I had this sense that
what I understood
was different to what they were
understanding about the world.
And religion, for example.
Some of the children
didn't seem to make sense
to me because I was starting
to be aware of other things.
I was getting
impressions as well.
I have memories of being
in my playground at school
and just having
impressions of other places
and even quite cosmic
things like other planets
and things like that.
So I was just getting
these impressions coming in
and then obviously,
that initial experience.
So the whole thing was giving
me a very different sense
than the other kids around me.
>> And in your book, you were
saying that you seemed to have
a grasp of things very easily
at a very young age that maybe
other kids didn't as well.
I mean, even
intellectually, your mind
was able to expand rather
rapidly at a young age.
>> Yeah.
I was finding the very
structured education system
much too limiting.
And I was looking
into other areas
and was much more
open to things that
weren't within the bracket
of what I was being told
and how I was being
told the way things are.
So it was a real
really different angle
on the whole wave.
>> And then to the information
that you had to study as part
of a matter of course in school,
those things came somewhat
easily for you?
Or your brain simply did
not want to go there?
>> Certain things did and
certain things didn't.
I was not convinced by
some of it, like I said,
and other things I was more
interested in, especially
history in ancient civilizations
and things like that.
>> All things mystical were
really appealing to you.
>> Yeah.
Things that seemed to
have some connection
to what I was experiencing.
We had one teacher
in particular who
had traveled to
Mexico, to Egypt,
and different places that had
a mystical flavor to them.
And he would give
us lectures on that
even when we were very small.
And then I also
had an art teacher.
She took us to National
Gallery in central London
and talked about the
mythology behind a lot
of the great paintings and
great art that you see.
So there was this sense
of there being more
to a lot of different levels.
And I was very drawn to
Greek mythology and all
these different
mythologies that you
see within these great
paintings by da Vinci
and these kinds of artists.
So I think that was something
that really drew me.
>> Yes.
And when normally at age
six, seven, and eight,
that wouldn't be the first draw.
But there you were.
By 12 years old,
you were actually
starting to have experiences,
out of body experiences.
Can you talk a little bit
about that and what happened?
And as we go further
along in this,
I'm going to pick your brain as
to some of the things you saw.
>> OK.
Well, the very first out of body
experiences were very short.
They weren't the classic--
a lot of people describe this
idea of coming out of the body
and then looking down
at yourself from above.
My very first experience
is I was upright
as if I was standing in
the middle of the room,
but I was floating a few
feet above the ground.
So very different to
what a lot of people
will just describe when they
have out of body experiences.
And they were always in the way.
I was always upright.
And I had maybe two or
three of those initially.
Only lasted a few seconds.
And then I saw
something on the TV
or read something about
how astral projection
or out of body experiences
can be induced.
And these things can
lead you somewhere.
You can travel around
the world or you
can explore your spirituality
through them and things
like that.
So I then went looking
for a book on the subject.
And actually not
very far from here,
I found a book shop that had
one book by a parapsychologist
called Janet Lee
Mitchell, which was quite
scientific in its outlook.
But it had this sense that this
was a real objective thing.
A lot of the books out
there are much more
dreamy or kind of
beyond the normal pale
of what we understand.
But this book was quite solid.
So that was a good place
for me to start, in a way.
So I read through that.
And then towards the
back of the book,
there was some really
basic techniques
that were probably way
too simple in a way.
But I persevered with it, and
I went through these techniques
for about--
it took me about six months.
>> Yeah, you were
really dedicated.
>> Yeah.
>> You'd lie there when most
kids are daydreaming and trying
to go to sleep, and you
are trying to catapult out
of your body at
such a young age.
>> And I did it every night.
>> Every night.
Yeah.
I was impressed with
your persistence.
>> Yeah.
And then I think I was about 14.
And I had my first induced
out of body experience,
which was just like
this surge of energy,
almost like an electric
bolt went through my body,
just shot out my
body above myself
around 16, something like
that, looking down at myself.
And there was a
kind of bluish glow
coming off of the
second body I was in.
And the whole room seemed
to be lit from that,
so I could look around the room.
But I couldn't move other
than kind of rotating.
And looking at myself
laying on the bed,
it didn't feel like me.
It just felt almost
like a sculpture.
>> Like Madam Tussaud's
Museum of Wax Art.
>> Yeah.
I mean, I almost had
to check that it was me
because I didn't
really feel like I
had much of a relationship
with the body laying there.
I just knew logically
that it must be me
because this is my room.
>> That looks like
me lying there.
Right.
But you were actually the source
of the illumination in the room
and the observer in the room.
And this is the holy grail
in all spiritual journeys
that people are trying to get
to know that part of themselves
or to understand that
part of themselves better.
>> Sure.
>> And you were having some
very direct experiences.
>> I think that's the
key, this directness,
this sense of-- that's what's
really amazing about out
of body experiences is that they
can give us this direct link
or direct experience of
something more than ourselves.
I can't really think
of any other practice
that you can do that can
give you that as much.
>> Very true.
And sometimes people
do have this experience
without even knowing what it
is, a feeling of disorientation.
I've had a few little accidental
out of body experiences.
In fact, one in which I ended up
flying down a flight of stairs
and landed because I thought I
was concerned about something
happening downstairs
with my son,
landed upside down in
the middle of the room,
and he was out of
his body sitting up
watching me out of my body.
And it was all so--
I was so embarrassed
of being upside down,
I actually snapped myself
back into my physical body.
I thought this is bad.
I'm hanging here like
a bat upside down
in the middle of the room.
[LAUGHS] And just because
I'd simply flown down
the stairs headfirst and just
landed that way more or less.
And that wasn't a particularly
spiritual opening for me.
It was just a source of
embarrassment in that moment.
And we have silly little
things like this that happen
or just a sense of
something being disorienting
in a place of
patterns and color.
And that is actually
that crossover place
for a lot of people, isn't it?
>> Yeah.
I think there's a kind
of spectrum experiences.
And I think you've
got the more--
just a kind of gut
feeling that you get.
That's like the beginning place
maybe, a sense of something
else or that awareness
that almost everyone has,
or a sense that
someone they know
is going to phone them
shortly, and then they do.
Those kind of gut experiences
at the beginning part.
But then I think you
go along that spectrum
and you get to something
like remote viewing
or this idea of trying
to perceive something
at a distance.
And then you get to a more
full separation experience,
which is what the out
of body experience is,
in my understanding.
>> And so you learned how to
control it then by the age
of about 14.
And were you able--
I mean, off and on-- not
necessarily every day
at every moment you
chose-- but were you
able to continually project
yourself out of body
after that into this time?
>> Well, once I had the
very first experience,
it was almost like I'd
open the floodgates.
And then I was having a lot
more out of body experiences.
But it took me a long time
to get comfortable with going
further from myself.
The bedroom was almost like
my limit for a long time.
And I think that was to do
with my own psychological
limitations.
>> Fear.
>> Fear, sure.
Yeah.
That going outside of my
house or going further afield
might lead to me--
I don't know-- dying
or something like that.
>> Sure.
Understandable.
>> So it took me a long
time to get over that.
But then eventually,
I pushed through--
literally pushed
through the window
and moved out into
the street and then
started to move around the local
area that I was familiar with.
And over time, gradually moved
further and further afield.
So that was the process.
>> And as I was reading
this in your book,
you would talk about the
luminescence of objects,
of trees, and inanimate objects.
I remember you
saying at one point
that sometimes
inanimate objects almost
seemed to possess more life
force than animate objects.
And you spoke of trees
on a number of occasions
because you would
go out into nature
and do quite a bit of this.
And can you talk about that
a little bit, some of what
you saw to bring to
those who have not
had this experience the
nature energetically of a tree
or a building or whatnot?
>> Well, I think it's
maybe something to do with
the frequency that
particular things operate on.
When you're in a building
like this that's been here
for a long time
and has always had
this sense of spiritual
activity going on,
I think that it builds up
this aura, if you like,
or some kind of
impression that goes
into the very fabric
of the building.
And I think when I was
having my first experiences,
I was picking up on that.
So I would go past a
building that's very old.
I mean, some buildings in
London can be 1,000 years old.
So as you pass that
building, I would
see this sense of the energy
nature of the building.
Maybe its true
form, if you like,
or maybe just some
underlying level of it.
>> And what would
that look like?
>> Often, it would look
almost like heat signatures,
almost like different
colors radiating out.
I often found that there
were oranges and yellows.
But it would depend
on the building,
and it would maybe depend
on what the connection was
with the building.
So that was something that
was interesting to explore
to really look at what that
signature was and see if that
had any relationship
to what that
might mean, what that building
was used for, things like that.
But then on other
occasions, like I
was saying, with trees
or with human beings,
you might be more on that
frequency on another occasion.
And I would see almost
like the life force
moving through the
trunk of the tree
or moving through
the leaves and get
this sense of the whole
process of the plant
drawing up nutrients from the
soil and the whole spectrum
of life.
But you would see on
a different level.
And through this
outer body perception,
it was like you could
go right into it
and explore the whole
nature of that plant.
Because although maybe we would
assume that we're using eyes,
and sometimes we would sense
a body and things like that,
I came to the conclusion
that that's just something
that we assume.
But really, we're
not using eyes.
It's almost like a direct
link with our consciousness.
So we can, in my experience,
directly link with a plant
or directly link
with another person
and maybe get some impression
from that and draw from that.
I mean, it opens up the whole
idea of psychical abilities
and those kinds of ideas really.
>> And you also had--
I remember one experience
I was reading about
in which you were emerging with
a little animal in the forest.
It was so sweet.
Can you talk about that?
I just loved that
part of the story.
>> Well, I used to go to
this open nature area to do--
>> Was this the new forest
area or a different area?
>> This was actually just
in London that experience
happened, on Hampstead Heath,
which is a big open heath area.
And I used to go there
a lot just to meditate
and to do different practices.
And on this particular
day, I was looking out
into the darkness of the trees
and everything around me.
And I started to see
these points of light
appearing as I was going
deeper into my state of trance,
if you like, or whatever
you want to call it.
And I started to see these
points of light all around me.
And then I realized as I
focused on them more and more
that these points of
light were little animals.
They were like consciousness.
Little vole or
mouse-like creatures.
And as I focus more
and more, I seem
to go deeper and deeper
into this connection
with these other creatures.
And eventually, it was
like I tuned into the life
cycle of one of these voles.
And I experienced
the whole process
of it going into its home, being
around the other creatures,
coming out, looking for
food and foraging around,
this whole experience
of its life.
And then eventually, one day,
I went out in the daylight.
And a bird of prey basically--
I remember the feeling, the
talons basically coming around
me in this experience.
And then the experience ending.
>> Just lights went out.
And when you were
talking about this,
you mentioned that there
was this sense of fear
in this animal just to go
out and get what it needed
to get and bring it back.
I mean, just the basic survival.
There was always a sense
of fear in the little body,
just getting
through another day.
>> Yeah, a sense of--
especially at daylight.
The daylight was quite
fearful and dangerous.
And also a sense of awareness
of all the other creatures.
It was almost like they were
very joined much more than I
experience in a human sense.
>> They had to be aware of
where the other species were,
what they were doing,
whether they were in danger,
whether they were safe.
>> And each other as well.
Yeah.
it's almost like their survival
instinct was joining together.
And that's how they operated.
So yeah, that was a very
interesting experience.
It was like this opened up this
real insight to other animals
and that we're all on
a continuum of life.
It's not we're human and
they're something else.
We're all part of the process
of life is how I see it.
>> And this really is the theme
throughout the book is once
you've started being able to
navigate in these other areas
of consciousness, this sense of
connectivity where human beings
feel distinctly separate.
>> Yeah, I think definitely the
theme running through is that
from this direct experience,
there is this sense
of interconnectedness or of
oneness or that we're not all
divided up, which I think is
quite an age old spiritual
teaching.
But I think through
experiences like this,
we can directly
encounter that, and we
can know that rather than
just kind of theorize about it
or whatever.
So that's what I think
is really valuable that I
was trying to get across.
And that it doesn't really
matter the context either.
I mean, talking about
the fact that I grew up
in quite a rough part of
London and things like that,
I think that all
added to the process
because it gave me this
sense of separation
maybe to a lot of
the traditional ideas
of spirituality, but not in a
way that I thought they were
wrong or anything like that.
But a separation that I needed
something slightly different
to speak to me
because I was coming
from a slightly different
social cultural experience
to what most people who
talk about these things are.
So I think that was important
with writing the book as well.
>> Yeah.
And you had to deal with
your own survival issues,
being mugged and the like,
and who you were going
to create an alliance with.
And you have these experiences--
and we're going to get
to that in a moment,
including precognition--
where you were
literally living within
these explosive
literally and violent
experiences as you
were out of body.
And these were
future events, which
brings a whole other
subject up in terms
of the complexity of time and
space and what it really is.
And it seemed that you
were being confronted
with the notion of
making choices constantly
but also of looking
at and evaluating
the nature of acts of violence.
And this became a theme that
you were working through
from the other side.
Can you talk about what happened
there and then the first
of the precognitive events?
>> Well, because of the
environment I grew up
in in London, there
was, I would say,
a lot of frustration and a
lot of inequality and a lot
of problems around me.
>> Lot of poverty I assume.
>> And I think that led
to people sometimes acting
violently towards me and
to other people around.
And there was this
sense of survival
that came into the
equation again.
There was this sense
that I had to deal
with what London was creating.
So in a way, I
built up this block,
this persona that
was about dealing
with how people can
treat each other
and how a big city can influence
you and change the way you
interact with other people.
So there was this real
sense that for a long time,
I was quite trapped in that.
But then with the out
of body experiences,
I started to get this sense of
through the interconnectedness
that there was no need
for that separation.
And in a way, if
we let go of that,
then we can start to
change that situation,
and we can start to
understand that situation
and look at the
frustrations and the things
that cause people to
act in those ways.
So I think the whole
crux of spirituality
in a way started to
seem to me that it
was to do with an idea
of arising compassion,
that the more you experience
this interconnectedness,
or the more that
you see that people
act in certain ways,
violent or whatever,
because they've been through
certain things in their life,
it's like the situations
will inform us, I believe.
And through that,
you become whatever
you're going to become.
And if we can open up to
these spiritual level,
no matter who you
are at the beginning,
it starts to break down
those violent aspects
of your personality or
the disconnected aspects
of your personality.
So that was kind
of the process I've
been through with all of that.
But then with the
precognitive experiences,
they really helped to open me
up to thinking about compassion
and thinking about--
because for a long time, I was
wondering what they actually
meant.
For example, the first
one happened in '99.
And I had this
experience where it
was the most intense
experience I ever had.
We were doing a small
workshop with five friends,
and we were in this big space.
And we went through
this G technique,
which is one of the techniques
I've developed for inducing out
of body experiences.
And on this particular day,
I went really, really deep
into a very deep trance state.
And then I found
myself moving through
this natural environment.
And then from that, there was
a kind of break in the vision,
in the experience.
And I found myself
standing on Old Compton
Street in Soho in central
London looking down the street.
And there was people
moving around,
and everything was
happening as it usually did.
But my vision was
completely bluish gray.
Everything around me looked
tinted with that color.
So this is another
example of how
vision kind of can represent
what you're seeing maybe
in some ways.
And then suddenly there
was this explosion burst
out from the right hand side
of the street up ahead of me.
And I saw a man running
towards the explosion,
and then I saw other people, the
chaos all happening from that.
And then I felt almost this
wave of emotion hit me.
And I didn't move from the spot.
I was just kind of frozen on the
spot looking down the street.
And then the experience
slowly faded away.
But it didn't leave me.
It was almost like that
emotional impact that I'd had
was still with me.
So even though I started
to become present,
I was in the room
again, I had this sense
that I couldn't just
come straight out of it.
So I remember, there
was a friend near me,
and he was almost
coaxing me out of it.
And he was aware of the
depth of what happened.
Everyone had this sense
that this really strong
powerful experience between us.
So there was this feeling
of almost like foreboding,
quite a heavy feeling in
the room because of this.
And as I gradually
came out of it
and my friend
coaxed me out of it,
It seemed to continue
even for days afterwards.
I had not a negative
feeling or a foreboding
after that, but for the
few days afterwards.
I just had this sense of things
before they happened almost.
And I remember I was on
a bus a few days after,
and I just started thinking
of someone I hadn't
seen in two years or whatever.
And then I think it was
about three stops later,
that person got on the bus.
>> Got on the bus.
>> But this is within a day
or two with the other thing.
So as yet, it hadn't happened,
but I'd seen this bombing.
And then literally
five days later, there
was this explosion.
>> The Soho bombing.
That's what you saw.
>> It happened.
Yeah.
So that--
>> And this happened again.
I mean, with the
London bombings,
you had the same experience.
>> Yeah.
It's interesting
the way I've always
seemed to have this
connection with London.
>> Yes.
Well, you're of that.
I mean, it's part
of your frequencies.
But how did you contend
with the time and space
aspect of what had happened?
>> It was really difficult.
>> Because you were
you were living it.
You were feeling the event.
>> Yeah.
Obviously, with the
first experience,
I did think that it
was going to happen,
but I'd never had a
precognition before.
And I only believed
it was going to happen
because of the intensity
and the realism of it.
And I wasn't aware of anything
else that happened like that.
So I was convinced in
some ways that it would,
but I couldn't be sure.
But then when it
happened five days later,
obviously, that really threw me.
Just threw me, yeah.
>> Well, you have to then begin
questioning things like what is
essentially predestined?
If you had already
experienced it
five days before
it occurred, you
were obviously out of
the time space continuum
into what we would in a linear
fashion call the future,
but not necessarily if it's
all unfolding at the same time.
You were in another
dimensional aspect of time.
>> It could have
been a potentiality.
>> There's lots
of possibilities.
But it really opened me
up to exploring that.
And I remember when I
was writing the book,
I spoke to people
like Dean Radin.
>> Yes.
>> I talked to lots of different
scientists and tried to get
this sense of what might have
been going on that level.
And I tried to take this almost
neutral position that I think
the best thing to do is to
keep exploring the experiences
and see where that unfolds
and see what that shows us
and try not to commit to any
particular ideology or theory.
Because I think, in
a way, those things
stop us finding out what
might be really going
on in some ways.
So yeah, I just explored.
And then this other
experience happened
where I was over Moorgate
Station, tube station.
And I moved down
over the station
and went down literary
straight through the floor
through the black pavement.
>> And you were bold by then.
>> I was bold.
>> You were bold in
your adventures by then.
Out of the bedroom.
[LAUGHS]
>> Yeah, sure.
I mean, these
experiences as well
had this feeling
that I didn't even
have the separation process.
I would just find myself there.
It was kind of like I was
just being drawn there
in an instant.
So it did feel very
much like I was supposed
to witness these things.
So I went down through the
pavement into the tunnel.
So I was literally
floating in the middle
of where the train would be, but
there was no train there yet.
And I was just looking out to
the signs and Moorgate Station
signs along the platform.
And then the train did come in,
and I was basically inside it.
But I let it go out
of the station again,
and then I followed behind.
So now it was heading off
into Liverpool Street Station.
And as I came up behind
it and it moved out
to the next station, I
stopped at Liverpool Street,
and I didn't continue to follow.
And the train went
off into the tunnel,
and that's when the
explosion happened.
And again, I had this kind
of emotional wave hit me,
an emotional wave at
the same time almost
as the physical wave,
the impact of the--
>> The collective
emotional impact.
Yes.
>> So with that particular
one, it was really different
in a lot of ways
because afterwards,
I had this real sense that
it was going to happen
because I'd had the previous
experience a few years earlier.
But in that experience, I didn't
know whether it would happen
or not.
But this one, I felt much more
convinced that it would happen.
It had the bluish--
>> I was just going to say it
had the signature blue energy,
right.
And that denotes future events
oftentimes in your experience,
right?
>> It has-- I've only ever had
three of those experiences.
One was the most--
well, one of the most accurate
experiences I had in terms
of being able to see the
way things were objectively.
It didn't have a
precognitive element,
or I don't think it had
a precognitive element.
There was nothing to show
that it was a future event.
But I traveled to
this office room
near to Portobello Road Market,
one of the famous markets
in London.
And then in that
office, I could see
the name of the
person on his desk,
and I could see the postcode.
West 11, I remember, the white
signs you get across London.
And just that I knew where it
was by location, by the trip
I'd gone through.
So I was able to
verify that by checking
his address and the name and
seeing that they matched.
>> And going back
there in physical form.
Yes.
>> So that was also the bluish
gray kind of experience.
And then there was the
Soho bombing and then
the London bombings.
So all of those
had that quality.
So I know that if something
happens in that way, it's--
>> It's real.
It's likely real.
>> It's a important experience.
>> Yes, important.
Yes.
Now, this became known--
I mean, obviously,
you've done lectures,
you've written a book.
You have enabled, as
you say, to connect
with a lot of the people in
the field of quantum physics
such as Dean Radin and others.
And also, you've connected
with Rupert Sheldrake, who
we'll be meeting with tomorrow.
And can you talk a little
bit about the nature
of what you've been doing
in conjunction with Rupert
and some of these very
interesting experiments
that are happening?
>> Well, with Rupert,
we initially contact--
well, I initially got in
contact with him to do with--
I wanted to create
an experiment that
would be almost
like an installation
because I've worked
with installation
on these large constructions
that are designed
to help people have out of
body experiences or experience
something beyond themselves.
So I've worked with
that a lot in the past.
And I was interested in the
idea of doing that with Rupert
and seeing if we could
take some of the ideas
that he's looking at in
his scientific experiments
and building that into
some kind of installation.
So that was our initial idea.
And then what happened was
he done some recent research.
And some skeptics
had turned around
and said, well,
this research could
have been done by cheating
with a mobile phone
or something of that nature.
So then we started looking
into the possibility
of doing some experiments
that would be done in a place
that mobile phones
could not be used
or no signals could be used.
So we ended up finding
this deep basement.
>> Dungeon.
[LAUGHS]
>> Yeah.
Dungeon almost in East London
with very thick concrete walls
and a metal door.
And from that, we thought this
would be the perfect location
to do it.
And we even went
one step further
and used a device that
cuts out all mobile phone
signals for 100 meters.
So it was only used
within the building,
but we had that down
in the basement.
>> And then what was the
nature of the experiment?
>> The experiments
were on telepathy.
So we wanted to telephone
telepathy specifically.
So we wanted to see if we could
do this in a literal setup
with having people
physically there and then
having-- the whole thing
was computer automated.
So it would randomly
select a person
from this person's friends.
And then they would
answer the phone,
and they would have to press
the number on the keypad, which
would tell the system
which person they
thought was calling.
So there was this sense of
they had to reach out and try
and say is it my mother
or is it my father
or whichever person
they'd selected.
>> And it didn't matter whether
it is literally the mother
or father.
As you say, this was a
computer selected experience.
>> Oh, it was literally
the person on the other end
of the phone.
>> Oh, it did?
>> But the computer
would pick who to call.
>> I see.
>> So what would happen
is it would call that
person's mother.
And then there would
be an open line,
and then the person
doing the experiment
would pick up the phone, and
it would get a computer system
which would ask
them who they think
is waiting to be connected.
So then they'd have
to select the caller,
and it went from there.
And this was part of Rupert's
work over several years as he--
the Perrott-Warrick research
he was doing at Cambridge.
So he put this all into
his database of research
over many years.
And he's now completed
that whole process.
I think five years
he was doing that.
>> Yes.
I think we're going to be
talking about that tomorrow.
But although I think
certainly people like Rupert
are just pearls on this
planet, that they're
willing to have the
patience and time
and open mind and
curiosity to take
on these kinds of experiments,
from your point of view
being someone who has
been able to simply live
within these experiences from a
very early age, what do you see
as the next leap, so to speak?
How long does--
I'm just asking
your impressions.
How long do we
have to keep trying
to prove that these phenomena
exist within each of us?
>> Ooh.
I think the next step
is the bringing together
of brain science in a
way and the research
into psychic abilities
as they are now.
Because I think what
we've got is on one side,
you've got skeptics
doing neuroscience
that says, oh, if I stimulate
this part of the brain,
and this person feels
like they're floating,
that means that out
of body experiences
are just this part of
the brain malfunctioning.
To me, that doesn't
follow because we
can stimulate the brain to think
other things as well, which
are not illusionary.
For example, if I
stimulate the brain
to think I'm tasting
an apple in my mouth,
doesn't mean the apples
are therefore an illusion.
So that kind of thinking
doesn't really stand up.
>> That's very
materialistic by nature.
>> Sure.
Yeah.
>> What you experienced a view
that illuminated that room from
the very first experience, there
was nothing materialistic about
it.
There was no material there.
>> No.
But I try to keep
objective and to say, well,
can we test these things
and can we look at them?
And I think to some degree,
we can, especially with things
like remote viewing.
I think it's harder with
out of body experiences
because they're
less controllable.
But it is something I think
needs to be done more.
And like I said, the way
I think that can be done
is by bringing what we
know of the neuroscience
together with research
like what Rupert is doing.
Or I think there is a few
people like Michael Persinger.
I don't know if
you know his work.
>> I don't know him.
No.
>> He developed a thing called
the Koren Helmet or the God
Helmet, as it's been nicknamed.
And it uses magnetic fields
to stimulate the brain
and can induce mystical
type experiences
or it seems to be able to induce
mystical type experiences.
Now, a lot of the skeptics have
drawn from Persinger's work
and said, well, this shows that
all these things must therefore
be illusions, like I was saying.
But the interesting
thing is Persinger
himself doesn't believe that.
Persinger has been exploring
remote viewing and telepathy
and believes that what we
can do by bringing together
the neuroscience is
we can get to a point
where we might be able
to enhance these things.
Because all psychic
abilities seem to be--
if you're like a weak signal,
like a weak radio signal.
And any sort of
psychical ability
is an ability to tune
into that signal.
And maybe we can enhance that.
>> And we've seen some of
that through work in the more
sophisticated forms of neuro
feedback and certainly where
they run tests on 30, 40 year
practicing Buddhist monks where
their gamma activity will
be off the charts compared
to the average
person, for example.
And that same
technology with practice
can also boost those states.
So this appears to be almost a
chemical interface between you
and the actual physical brain.
>> Yeah.
>> The self and the brain.
So I think that's an area
that really fascinates me.
And I think that's
where things are going.
I think we can really look
towards bringing together
those two things.
And then maybe in the future,
what we now call psychical
will actually be something
that we can really tune
into in a very efficient way.
It might be a new
form of internet
or a new form of
technology that's
never been imagined before
bringing our own abilities
closer, allowing normal
people who maybe never
have these kinds of experiences
to connect that easier.
>> Yes.
>> I think that's what a lot
of people have been looking
towards over the years.
Robert Monroe, for
example with his research
into hemi sync and
looking at different ways
to allow everyday people who
don't have these things to get
closer to those states.
>> And so have you had any of
your own future visions about
any of this?
I mean, have you ever
been out looking around,
and then have you
glimpsed the future?
>> I've not looked into
specifically that kind
of thing, no.
With the precognitive things,
they tend to just happen.
>> Right.
>> So I haven't attempted that.
But I think it's
very interesting you
can explore those kinds of
ideas with remote viewing.
And I do work sometimes
with developing those areas
and looking into those areas.
But yeah, not as yet.
I haven't looked into that one.
>> And what about your
generation from your perception
of it?
I notice my son-- who
is now 29 years old--
I notice a very
distinctly different way
of interacting with each other
and accepting each other, more
of an openness.
A lot of the old structures
for his generation--
you're little older
than that, but still--
seem to really be dying
out, which I think
is a fabulous thing, personally.
What do you see your generation
bringing to the table
and moving into en mass?
And I'm not saying specifically
because, of course,
there's every variance
in your generation
as mine and my parents
and grandparents.
But what do you
see the uniqueness
of what your generation brings
and the ones you've been
doing this kind of work with?
>> I think-- like you said, I
think there's a real openness.
I think there's a shift away
from the structures and even
the whole way that
we think about ideas.
For example, when
I've been to debates
or when I've taken
part in debates
and those kinds of ways, we
think about ideas in the world
seem to be very competitive
and very black and white
that you will have one side
on one side of the debate
and the other side.
And they--
>> Affirmative and negative
>> They argue.
And then there's not this
sense of can we mutually learn?
Can we mutually
try to understand
where the other
person is coming from
or develop or add
to my perspective
from learning about
your perspective?
In a way, it seems
like the ideas
that have been there before
seem almost immature, in a way.
I feel like we might be maturing
to a more understanding,
more accepting, more balanced
way of working with things
that's focused on learning
rather than focused on I'm
right and you're wrong.
>> Winning.
>> Winning, exactly.
This competitive
sense that seems
to have dominated thinking
for a long time in philosophy,
in so many areas that really
shouldn't be like that.
It should be about moving
towards a better understanding.
And I think psychical research
and the skeptic proponent
divide that you see a lot that
we were just talking about
is a good example of that.
Because instead of
trying to say, well,
what are the
skeptics getting at?
Why do they see the things
the way they see things?
And why did the
believers or proponents
or whatever you
want to call it, why
do they see things like that?
And trying to say,
well, maybe we
can learn a bit from each side.
Because I think you can learn
from a skeptical position
of not just believing
everything and being discerning
in how you understand things.
And also not jumping in with
both feet and just saying,
well, let's take our time.
And we don't have
to know the answers.
We don't have to
know all the truths.
We can enjoy the process of
we're moving towards that.
Truth could actually be
our guide in the process
rather than the end
result, if you like.
>> That's a beautiful
way to put it.
And it's so much healthier.
A place to come from
in your explorations
is looking toward the
journey than the answer
and being right.
There's such a rush to
be right so that someone
can own a certain type
of intellectual terrain
or property that it actually
blocks the exploration
for a greater truth.
>> Of course.
Yeah.
I mean, if you really
want to get to truth,
then you can't just take a
philosophy and say, right.
I think that one
works and that fits.
And therefore, I'm not going
to look at anything else.
Or I'm just going to
defend this territory.
Because really, the
likelihood that's
actually moving you away
from the truth or whatever.
But we do see that far
too much unfortunately.
So yeah, that's where
I see the future.
>> And any final thoughts?
You wrote this
book for a reason.
You were compelled to do it.
And there's a lot
of beauty in it.
>> Thank you.
I think I wrote the book
because I wanted to reach out
to people who may be coming
from a different background
or a different set of
ideas or experiences.
And I wanted to really
try and reach them
and say, well, spirituality
happens everywhere.
It doesn't happen just
in a Buddhist monastery
or in some place by a lake.
It does happen in
the middle of a city
with negative things
happening around you.
And you can actually draw
from the worst of situations
and grow from that.
So I think that's
really what I was trying
to get across in the book.
That's the whole concept of it
being about the human spirit
in both senses of the word.
The sense of us trying to
move out of the limitations
that we might find ourselves in.
>> Well, beautifully done.
And I appreciate
you taking the time.
You're actually living
in Estonia right now.
So we've both come a ways.
We've come from San Francisco.
I thank you for taking the
time to be here with us.
>> You're welcome.
It was really nice.
>> It's a pleasure meeting you.
>> You too.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To learn more about Graham's
journey in consciousness,
you can find a copy of Graham's
book "Avenues of the Human
Spirit" at amazon.com.
Until next time, thanks
for watching CMN.